over the past four years this five acre
pasture on the university of kentucky
Spindletop research farm has often been
the only green spot during the hot dry
days of summer it's unusually green
because this pasture was seated with a
variety of warm seasons Bermuda grass
developed specifically for pasture
systems university of kentucky horse
specialist bob coleman then graduate
student kristen Herbst have spent many
hours rotating a group of horses between
four or five grazing paddocks within
this field they keep track of body
weights and condition scores they
observe the horses grazing patterns and
other behaviors and analyze forage
samples with the help of the campus
based USDA AG Research Service Unit
Coleman hopes their final results will
point to a new management system to help
horse owners maximize the potential of
their pasture land during the hot summer
months I think a lot of horse owners
have the idea that they'd like to feed
some grain every day but I don't think
they take into account how significant
the pasture and the forage component of
other horses diet really can be so we
wanted to show that by establishing a
grazing strategy that would take
advantage of as much forage as we could
produce and move the horses as required
but still meet maintenance requirements
UK plant scientist Charles Dougherty
established and now directs the
maintenance of the Bermuda grass pasture
he says the seeded cold hardy Bermuda
grass tolerates Kentucky's cold winters
and then thrives in the summer when cool
season grasses go dormant this this
grass will may be on a good day could
grow it say four hundred pound zero
matter per acre per day in these
temperatures fescue bluegrass grass
probably quit growing when it's in the
90s so it's a high-quality grass it's
extremely fast growing and it's
extremely high yielding so the good news
is that research has found a good clean
forage base that can be grazed and
harvested when other grasses are dormant
but Bermuda grass does have its
challenges it's a lot of work
there are a lot of resources that go
into working a Bermuda grass pasture
from establishing you looking after the
weed control when you get started
looking after the nitrogen to keep it
growing throughout the year and taking
your time to manage the grass and that's
probably what the one resource that we
don't quantify and we don't deal with
but it's probably the biggest one you
need to be walking the pasture on a very
regular basis daily would work in order
to make maximum use of the feed coleman
adds that they now have enough solid
information to wrap up the research this
fall and they'll start to work in a
series of fact sheets on rotational
grazing for release next year
he says horse farmers need to work on a
new grazing strategy based on the forage
that's available rather than working off
a calendar